Germany’s Schäuble wants ‘reasonable’ Brexit deal for City
London’s financial centre services the whole European economy, finance minister says

Sun, Feb 5, 2017, 15:31
German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble: he says Germany does not want to punish Britain for its Brexit decision. Photograph: Stephanie Lecocq/EPA 
German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble: he says Germany does not want to punish Britain for its Brexit decision. Photograph: Stephanie Lecocq/EPA
 
Share to Facebook
Share to Twitter
Share to Email App
 
The City of London offers financial services that benefit Europe as a whole and the European Union should recognise that in a “reasonable” Brexit deal with Britain, German minister for finance Wolfgang Schäuble said in a newspaper interview Sunday.
“We don’t want to punish the British for their decision,” Mr Schäuble said in a pre-released interview with the Sunday edition of Tagesspiegel. “We want to keep Britain close to us.
“London’s financial centre serves the whole European economy,” he added. “London offers a quality of financial services that are not to be found on the continent. That would change a bit after a separation, but we have to find reasonable rules here with Britain.”
Divorce talks
British prime minister Theresa May is due to launch formal divorce talks with the EU by the end of March, leaving banks, insurers, asset managers and markets wondering how they can serve customers on the continent in future.
Currently, they use an “EU passport” allowing them to operate across the 28-nation bloc from a base in Britain.
EU leaders say access to the single market can only be granted in return for accepting the free movement of EU citizens and complying with rulings from the bloc’s top court, both of which are unacceptable to many of those who voted for Brexit.
Alternatives to passporting mainly include “third-country regimes” whereby the EU allows British financial firms to serve continental customers on condition they abide by rules similar to those in the bloc.
– (Reuters)